niccolò paganini arguably the greatest
violinist who ever lived was unlucky
when it came to gambling and never took
any chances with a tone or performance
of his instrument without this secret
musicians can ruin the finest set of
strings before ever playing their first
note yet with this secret your strings
can last longer and sound better than
otherwise possible let's begin with the
most valuable technical information
about your violin that you may ever
learn the finest bridge begins with the
finest maple aged to perfection yet
instead of deep flames plain maple is
chosen with distinct mark straw for its
stability strength and tone to create a
bridge blank the eyes heart arms and
legs are carved to the shape perfected
by Antonio Stradivari yet there are many
sizes and shapes of instruments and each
requires their own fitted bridge this
includes cutting the feet to perfectly
match the arching of the belting the
thickness of the bridge determines the
volume and response while the Archy
holds the strings at their proper
Heights above the fingerboard
shallow notches are filed into the top
of the bridge before the grooves are
burnished to a depth of slightly less
than 1/2 the diameter of each string
this initial burnishing requires a lot
of pressure and is accomplished by the
violin maker using special burnishers
with a polished radius slightly smaller
than each stream these compress and
harden the wood and the grooves for
smooth firm fit as you can see in this
first drawing the profile of each groove
is angled down slightly toward the
tailpiece so the bridge holds the
strings tightest on the fingerboard side
this eliminates buzzing while a small
radius formed at each end prevents the
windings of the strings from snagging
and breaking a thin layer of graphite is
then worked into this hardened surface
to provide for the smoothest tuning
possible and the purest tone imaginable
at the same time a bridge must have the
same angle of clearance between the
strings under the bow so those
impossible crossover passages can be
played evenly with the least amount of
effort
when these angles are identical the
distance from the top of the a string
above the E and D strings will be the
same as from the top of the D string
above the a and G strings the easiest
way to check this relationship is to
view the strings from the side and
verify that the two heights are the same
the grooves in the nut are just as
important as the bridge and must be
filed burnished radiused and graphite
'add to hold the strings at a height of
about 1/2 their diameter above a
properly scooped fingerboard
don't feel bad if you have to review
this information a couple times or pause
on each of the drawings as important as
all of this information is to your
ultimate success most of these details
have been traditionally reserved for the
masters but even if you don't replace
your own strings or do any of the
maintenance yourself no musician can
have the confidence of Paganini until
they know for themselves that their
bridge and nut have been properly carved
and cared for the best news is after
verifying that your instrument has been
properly set up your art is easy every
time you replace a string like Leary
burnish and graphite the grooves of the
bridge and nut while following these
rules it's best to have a pencil with a
long tapered tip and always keep the
diameter of the lead that comes in
contact with the groove smaller than the
diameter of the string carefully follow
the profile of the groove as firmly yet
smoothly as possible with the side of
the lid while being careful not to break
the pencil or slip out of the groove
even though you can use an eraser to
lighten the mark it will still show on a
fine bridge don't wipe off the excess
graphite after sharpening the pencil
each time this fine dust works into the
pores of the wood and lubricates it even
better landmark and steady your hands
for each position and most of all get
comfortable also turn the violin around
so you can coat the small radius on the
other end of the bridge groove also if
you follow these rules you should be
successful your very first time when
finished with a groove in the bridge
repeat the operation on the nut and as a
reminder remove and replace only one
string at a time or the sound post
inside your violin may fall when you're
satisfied that the grooves of the bridge
and nut are
smooth and lightly coated with graphite
blow off the excess dust wash your hands
and replace the string with all the
confidence in the world the real secret
is every time Paganini broke a string
he meant it
you